Storage Implementation
======================

LAKEsuperior stores non-RDF (“binary”) data in the filesystem and RDF
data in an embedded key-value store, `LMDB <https://symas.com/lmdb/>`__.

RDF Storage design
------------------

LMDB is a very fast, very lightweight C library. It is inspired by
BerkeleyDB but introduces significant improvements in terms of
efficiency and stability.

The LAKEsuperior RDF store consists of two files: the main data store
and the indices (plus two lock files that are generated at runtime). A
good amount of effort has been put to develop an indexing strategy that
is balanced between write performance, read performance, and data size,
with no compromise made on consistency.

The main data store is the one containing the preservation-worthy data.
While the indices are necessary for LAKEsuperior to function, they can
be entirely rebuilt from the main data store in case of file corruption
(recovery tools are on the TODO list).

Detailed notes about the various strategies researched can be found
`here <indexing_strategy.md>`__.

Scalability
-----------

Since LAKEsuperior is focused on design simplicity, efficiency and
reliability, its RDF store is embedded and not horizontally scalable.
However, LAKEsuperior is quite frugal with disk space. About 55 million
triples can be stored in 8Gb of space (mileage can vary depending on how
heterogeneous the triples are). This makes it easier to use expensive
SSD drives for the RDF store, in order to improve performance. A single
LMDB environment can reportedly scale up to 128 terabytes.

Maintenance
-----------

LMDB has a very simple configuration, and all options are hardcoded in
LAKESuperior in order to exploit its features. A database automatically
recovers from a crash.

The LAKEsuperior RDF store abstraction maintains a registry of unique
terms. These terms are not deleted if a triple is deleted, even if no
triple is using them, because it would be too expesive to look up for
orphaned terms during a delete request. While these terms are relatively
lightweight, it would be good to run a periodical clean-up job. Tools
will be developed in the near future to facilitate this maintenance
task.

Consistency
-----------

LAKEsuperior wraps each LDP operation in a transaction. The indices are
updated synchronously within the same transaction in order to guarantee
consistency. If a system loses power or crashes, only the last
transaction is lost, and the last successful write will include primary
and index data.

Concurrency
-----------

LMDB employs
`MVCC <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiversion_concurrency_control>`__
to achieve fully ACID transactions. This implies that during a write,
the whole database is locked. Multiple writes can be initiated
concurrently, but the performance gain of doing so may be little because
only one write operation can be performed at a time. Reasonable efforts
have been put to make write transactions as short as possible (and more
can be done). Also, this excludes a priori the option to implement
long-running atomic operations, unless one is willing to block writes on
the application for an indefinite length of time. On the other hand,
write operations never block and are never blocked, so an application
with a high read-to-write ratio may still benefit from multi-threaded
requests.

Performance
-----------

The `Performance Benchmark Report <performance.md>`__ contains benchmark
results.

Write performance is lower than Modeshape/Fedora4; this may be mostly
due to the fact that indices are written synchronously in a blocking
transaction; also, the LMDB B+Tree structure is optimized for read
performance rather than write performance. Some optimizations on the
application layer could be made.

Reads are faster than Modeshape/Fedora.

All tests so far have been performed in a single thread.
